# Models

## Branching process

Consider a homogenous continuous-time branching process like [phylodynamic birth-death models](https://academic.oup.com/mbe/article/29/1/347/1750040).
A new infection is _exposed_ and cannot cause new infections.
Infections transitions from exposed to being _infectious_ with rate $q_{EI}$[^1].
Infectious individuals give rise to new infections with rate $\lambda$, may be _detected_ with rate $\psi$, and recover (become noninfectious or die) with rate $\mu$.[^2]

When an individual is detected, with probability $r$[^1] they instantaneously recover and a contact-tracing procedure is initiated and used as a basis for ring vaccination.
Our model of contact tracing for ring vaccination is as follows.
There is a probability $p$ of detecting any given infection generated by the initially-detected infection.
If an infection is found, then the process recurses.
All such traced descendants have a probability $r$ of instantaneous recovery.

Absent detection ($\psi = 0$), the infectious period has on average duration $1 / \mu$, with $\lambda$ new infections per unit time, making $R_0 = \lambda / \mu$.
Absent contact tracing ($p = 0, \psi > 0$), the infectious period lasts on average $1 / (\mu + \psi r)$ and $R_e = \lambda / (\mu + \psi r)$.

With contact tracing, matters are more complicated.
The $p = 1$ case is akin to a model with subtree-targeted $\rho$-sampling (for a non-subtree-dependent example, see [Gavryushkina _et al._ (2014)](https://journals.plos.org/ploscompbiol/article?id=10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003919)).
That model has, to the best of my knowledge, not been described in the literature.
If we focus on the index case, which will have the largest $R_e$ because it cannot be located by contact tracing, we can bookend $R_e$ when $r = 1$.
It is no greater than at the $p = 0$ case, and minimized when $p = 1$.
At $p = 1$, if the case is ever detected, it is as if the entire subtree caused by the initial infection never existed.
This happens with probability $\psi / (\psi + \mu)$, so $R$ is reduced by one minus this amount.
Thus at minimum we have $R_e = \mu / (\psi + \mu) \times \lambda / (\psi + \mu)$.

---

[^1]: This is notation used in compartmental-like phylogenetic birth-death models, e.g. [BiSSE](https://academic.oup.com/sysbio/article/56/5/701/1694265).
[^2]: This is standard notation for phylodynamic birth-death models.
